---
layout: post
title: Boolean Masking
date: "2020-06-27 00:00:00"
description: CPU leak information through timings, caches accesses, power consumption, electromagnetic radiations or other compromising emanations. One very powerful way to recover this leaked information is through the Simple Power Analysis (SPA) and the more powerful Differential Power Analysis (DPA) attacks, which work by analyzing power or EM traces from a cipher's execution to recover the key and plaintext.
lang: en
locale: en_US
author: Darius Mercadier
excerpt: 
comments: false
hidden: true
---
     
<!-- intro -->
CPU leak information through timings [27], caches accesses [30,31,32],
power consumption [26,27,20], electromagnetic radiations [23,24,25] or
other _compromising emanations_ [28,29]. One very powerful way to
recover this leaked information is through the Simple Power Analysis
(SPA) and the more powerful Differential Power Analysis (DPA) attacks
[1], which work by analyzing power or EM traces from a cipher's
execution to recover the key and plaintext.

Several approaches to mitigate SPA and DPA have been proposed. For
instance, inserting dummy instructions, working with both data and
their complements or using hardware modules to randomize power
comsumtions [18], designing hardware gates whose power consumption is
independent of their inputs [10,19] or other harware randomization
modules [53]. The most popular countermeasures against SPA and DPA are
however based on _secret sharing_ [2,3], since they offer provable
security.


<!-- Masking -->
### Masking

Chari _et al._ [16] proposed a secret sharing scheme based on spliting
all intermediate values of a cipher, where each bit _b_ is encoded as
_k_ random shares such that `b = r1 ^ r2 ^ ... ^ rk`. The algorithm
must then be modified so that at no point it requires the original
value of _b_. An attacker having access to _n < k_ shares thus does
not have access to the secret bit _b_. Goubin and Patarin [17]
proposed a similar countermeasure under the name of _duplication
method_.

Inspired by Chari _et al._ [16] and Goubin and Patarin [17],
Messergers [6] applied two secret sharing schemes on the finalists of
the AES competition: _boolean masking_ and _arithmetic masking_. They
both consists in representing each bit with 2 bits: a random bit _r_
and a bit _x'_ such that _x' = x ^ r_ (boolean masking) or <code>_x' =
(x-r) mod 2<sup>32</sup></code>. Akkar and Giraud [4] applied similar
masking schemes to DES (boolean masking) and AES (arithmetic masking
in _GF(2<sup>8</sup>)_). Akkar and Giraud's scheme for AES was later
found vulnerable to some DPA attacks [14,15] (when some inputs are
zero, the masks were inefficient), but Golic and Tymen [15] overcame
this issue. Blömer _et al._ [5] then formally proved that all
intermediate results produced by this scheme are randomized (Golic and
Tymen's argument was only experimental). Doing this, they introduce
the notion of _perfect masking_: a masked algorithm is perfectly
masked at order _d_ if the distribution of any _d_ intermediate
results is statistically independent of any secret input.

<!--
Hardware offers more possibilities to design countermeasures against
masking. Tiri _et al._ [10] for instance proposed custom gates with
power consumption independent of their inputs. Popp and Mangard [19]
proposes a similar mechanism but easier to implement since it operates
at a higher level, thus requiring less custom hardware. Similarly,
trichina _et al._ [9] instead used 1-order masking schemes inspired by
[16] and [17], which are easier to implement than [10]. Similarly,
Ishai _et al._ [7] instead propopsed a masking scheme for any given
order, which they proved to be secure. Similarly, Oswald _et al._ [8]
used similar masking technique as Blömer _et al._ [5], but optimized
it by performing AES's S-box as an inversion in GF(4) rather than
GF(16). Nikova _et al._ [11,12] proposed a way to reduce the amount of
random bits required at the expanse of memory, since their scheme uses
more than two shares to achieve provable security against first order
DPA.
-->

<!-- security / models --> 
Most of the implementations of the masking schemes discussed so far
have been shown to be vulnerable _higher order DPA_ (HO-DPA)
[1,20,33,34], where an attacker combines multiple sources of leakage
to reconstruct the secrets. This called for higher order masking
(_i.e._ masking with more than more than one share)
[7,41,43,44,45,46]. In fact, some schemes were even vulnerable to
first-order DPA [14,15], which called for provably secure
implementations.

Ishai _et al._ [7] designed one of the first generic masking scheme to
secure any circuit against a _d_<sup>th</sup>-order DPA, and proved
its security in the _probing model_. In this model, an attacker is
able to place _d_ needles on _d_ wires, and thus gains access to _d_
intermediate values of a cipher, allowing him to construct a _d_-th
order DPA. They proved that their masking scheme with _d_ shares offer
security against a _d/2_<sup>th</sup>-order DPA. Rivain and Prouff
[41] and Coron _et al._ [42] later showed how to adapt Ishai _et
al._'s scheme to provide security against _d-1_<sup>th</sup>-order DPA
with _d_ shares.

Another line of research to generate DPA-secure implementations was
pioneerd by Mical and Reyzin [36], who put forward the assumption that
_only computation leaks information_. Crescenzo _et al._ [37] extended
Mical and Reyzin's work to produce the _bounded retrieval model_,
which supposes an upper bound on the amount of data retrieved by an
attacker, thus refining Maurer's _bounded storage model_ [38] that
supposed an upper bound on the storage capacity of an
attacker. Dziembowski and Pietrzak [39] futher refined Crescenzo _et
al._'s model to bound the amount of leakage per round. In 2013, Prouff
and Rivain [35] proposed the _noisy leakage model_, which states that
an observation of a value _x_ only implies a bounded bias in the
probability distruction of _x_, rather than reavaling _x_
altogether. Duc _et al._ [40] then showed a reduction of the noisy
leakage model to the probing model of Ishai _et al._ [7]: security in
the probing model implies security in the noisy leakge model.


<!-- Automatic generation -->
### Automatic software countermeasures


Bayrak _et al._ [52] designed one of the first automated
tool to automatically protect cryptographic code at software
level. Their approach is experimental: they determine sensitive
operations in a program by running it while recording power
traces. The operations that are found to leak information are then
protected using _random precharging_ [51], which consists in adding
random instructions before and after leaking instructions in order to
increase the noise.

Agosta _et al._ [56] developped a tool to automatically protect
ciphers against DPA using _code morphing_, which consists in
dynamically (at runtime) and randomly generate the code to be
executed. To do so, the cipher is broken into fragments of a few
instructions. For each fragment, several alternative (but semantically
equivalent) sequences of instructions are generated at compile
time. At runtime, a _polymorphic engine_ select for each time one of
the fragments it contains. The resulting code can leak secret data,
but an attacker would not know where in the original cipher the leak
is, since the code executing is dynamically randomized.

Moss _et al._ [54] proposed the first compiler to automate
first-order Boolean masking. Based on CAO's type system [55], the
developpers annotates the inputs of the program with `secret` or
`public`, and the compiler infers for each computation wether the
result is `secret` (one of its operand is secret) or `public` (all
operands are `public`). The compiler then searches for operations on
`secret` values that break the masking (for instance a `xor` where the
masks of the operands would cancel out), and fixes them by changing
the masks of its operands.

Sleuth [57] is a tool to automatically verify wether an implementation
leaks information that is statistically dependent on any secret input,
and would thus be vulnerable to SCA. Sleuth reduces this verification
to a Boolean satisfiability problem, and uses a SAT solver (in
practice, KLEE [59]) to solve it. In practice, Sleuth is implemented
as a pass in LLVM's backend [58], and is thus also able to ensure that
the compiler (LLVM) does not break masking by reodering instructions.


Eldib _et al._ [60] developed a tool similar to Sleuth called SC
Sniffer. However, whereas Sleuth verifies that all leakage is
statistically independent on any input, SC Sniffer ensures that a
cipher is perfectly masked, which is a stronger property. SC Sniffer
is also implemented as an LLVM pass and relies on the Yices SMT solver
[62] to conduct its analysis. Eldib and Wang [61] then built MC
Masker, to perform synthesis of masking countermeasures (SC Sniffer
only performs analysis). MC Masker generates the masked program using
_inductive synthesis_: it iteratively adds countermeasures until the
SMT solver is able to prove that the program is perfectly masked.


- (2015) Verified proofs of higher-order masking (maskverif). 

- (2016) Strong Non-Interference and Type-Directed Higher-Order
  Masking. t-NI similar to t-probing secure from [7]. t-SNI implies
  composability of the gadgets, thus allowing to secure a whole cipher
  by composing t-SNI gadgets. (maskComp)
 
- (2017) Parallel Implementations of Masking Schemes and the Bounded
  Moment Leakage Model: 
 
- (2018) Formal Verification of Side-channel Countermeasures via Elementary Circuit Transformations (checkmasks)

- (2018) Tight Private Circuits: Achieving Probing Security with the Least Refreshing
 
- (2019) Tornado: Automatic Generation of Probing-Secure Masked Bitsliced Implementations
 
 - NINA
   
"compilers to generate leakage free crypto"?
 - Leakage-Resilient Circuits without Computational Assumptions
 - Securing computation against continuous leakage
 - How to Compute in the Presence of Leakage
 - Protecting Cryptographic Keys against Continual Leakage

---
## References

[1] P. Kocher _et al._, [Differential Power Analysis](https://www.paulkocher.com/DifferentialPowerAnalysis.pdf), CRYPTO, 1999.

[2] G. R. Blakley, [Safeguarding cryptographic keys](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/32d2/1ccc21a807627fcb21ea829d1acdab23be12.pdf), 1979.

[3] A. Shamir, [How to Share a Secret](https://cs.jhu.edu/~sdoshi/crypto/papers/shamirturing.pdf), 1979.

[4] M. L. Akkar, C. Giraud, [An Implementation of DES and AES, Secure against Some Attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-44709-1_26.pdf), CHES, 2001.

[5] J. Blömer _et al._, [Provably Secure Masking of AES](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-30564-4_5.pdf), SAC, 2004.

[6] T. S. Messerges, [Securing the AES finalists against power analysis attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F3-540-44706-7_11.pdf), FSE, 2000.

[7] Y. Ishai _et al._, [Private Circuits: Securing Hardware against Probing Attacks](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~daw/papers/privcirc-crypto03.pdf), CRYPTO, 2003.

[8] E. Oswald _et al._, [A side-channel analysis resistant description of the AES S-box](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%252F11502760_28.pdf), FSE, 2005.

[9] E. Trichina _et al._, [Small size, low power, side channel-immune AES coprocessor: Design and synthesis results](https://eprint.iacr.org/2003/236.pdf), 2004

[10] K. Tiri _et al._, [A dynamic and differential CMOS logic with signal independent power consumption to withstand differential power analysis on smart cards](https://www.esat.kuleuven.be/cosic/publications/article-705.pdf), 2002.

[11] S. Nikova _et al._, [Secure hardware implementation of non-linear functions in the presence of glitches](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00145-010-9085-7.pdf), J. Cryptology, 2011.

[12] S. Nikova _et al._, [Threshold implementations against side-channel attacks and glitches](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11935308_38.pdf), ICICS, 2006.

[14] E. Trichina _et al._, [Simplified Adaptive Multiplicative Masking for AES](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-36400-5_15.pdf), CHES, 2002.

[15] J. D. Golic, C. Tymen, [Multiplicative Masking and Power Analysis of AES](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F3-540-36400-5_16.pdf), CHES, 2002.

[16] S. Chari _et al._, [Towards sound approaches to counteract power-analysis attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-48405-1_26.pdf), CRYPTO, 1999.

[17] L. Goubin, J. Patarin, [DES and Differential Power Analysis, the duplication method](http://www.goubin.fr/papers/dpafinal.pdf), CHES, 1999.

[18] J. Daemen, V. Rijmen, [Resistance Against Implementation Attacks A Comparative Study of the AES Proposals](https://www.esat.kuleuven.be/cosic/publications/article-362.ps), 1999.

[19] T. Popp, S. Mangard, [Masked dual-rail pre-charge logic: DPA-resistance without routing constraints](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11545262_13.pdf), CHES, 2005.

[20] T. Messerges, [Using second-order power analysis to attack DPA resistant software](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-44499-8_19.pdf), CHES, 2000.

[21] E. Oswald _et al._, [Practical Second-order DPA Attacks for Masked Smart Card Implementations of Block Ciphers](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.89.4278&rep=rep1&type=pdf), CT-RSA, 2006.

[22] S. Tillich, C. Herbst, [Attacking State-of-the-Art Software Countermeasures-A Case Study for AES](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-85053-3_15.pdf), CHES, 2008.

[23] J.-J. Quisquater, D. Samyde, [ElectroMagnetic Analysis (EMA): Measures and CounterMeasures for Smart Cards](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F3-540-45418-7.pdf), Esmart, 2002.

[24] K. Gandolfi _et al._, [Electromagnetic Analysis: Concrete Results](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-44709-1_21.pdf), CHES, 2001.

[25] J. R. Rao, P. Rohatgi, [EMpowering Side-Channel Attacks](https://eprint.iacr.org/2001/037.pdf), 2001.

[26] E. Biham, A. Shamir, [Power Analysis of the Key Scheduling of the AES Candidates](http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/~biham/Reports/aes-power.ps.gz), 1999.

[27] P. C. Kocher, [Timing Attacks on Implementations of Diffie-Hellman, RSA, DSS, and Other Systems](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/3-540-68697-5_9.pdf), CRYPTO, 1996.

[28] W. Eck, [Electromagnetic Radiation from Video Display Units: An Eavesdropping Risk](https://cryptome.org/emr.pdf), 1985

[29] P. Wright, Spycatcher – The Candid Autobiography of a Senior Intelligence Officer, 1987.

[30] J. Kesley _et al._, [Side Channel Cryptanalysis of Product Ciphers](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/BFb0055858.pdf), ESORICS, 1998.

[31] D. Page, [Theoretical use of cache memory as a cryptanalytic side-channel](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.152.9987&rep=rep1&type=pdf), 2002.

[32] D. J. Bernstein, [Cache-timing attacks on AES](https://cr.yp.to/antiforgery/cachetiming-20050414.pdf), 2005.

[33] J. Waddle, D. Wagner, [Towards Efficient Second-Order Power Analysis](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-28632-5_1.pdf), CHES, 2004.

[34] M. Joye _et al._, [On Second-Order Differential Power Analysis](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11545262_22.pdf), CHES, 2005.

[35] E. Prouff, M. Rivain, [Masking against side-channel attacks: A formal security proof](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-38348-9_9.pdf), EUROCRYPT, 2013.

[36] S. Micali, L. Reyzin, [Physically Observable Cryptography](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-24638-1_16.pdf), TCC, 2004.

[37] G. Crescenzo _et al._, [Perfectly Secure Password Protocols in the Bounded Retrieval Model](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11681878_12.pdf), TCC, 2006.

[38] U. Maurer, [Conditionally-Perfect Secrecy and a Provably-Secure Randomized Cipher](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/BF00191321.pdf), Journal of Cryptology, 1992.

[39] S. Dziembowski, K. Pietrzak, [Leakage-resilient cryptography](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.215.1913&rep=rep1&type=pdf), FOCS, 2008.

[40] A. Duc _et al._, [Unifying leakage models: From probing attacks to noisy leakage](https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/079.pdf), EUROCRYPT, 2014.

[41] M. Rivain, E. Prouff, [Provably Secure Higher-Order Masking of AES](https://eprint.iacr.org/2010/441.pdf), CHES, 2010.

[42] J.-S. Coron _et al._, [Higher-Order Side Channel Security and Mask Refreshing](https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/359.pdf), FSE, 2013.

[43] K. Schramm, C. Paar, [Higher Order Masking of the AES](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.496.7125&rep=rep1&type=pdf), CT-RSA, 2006.

[44] M. Rivain _et al._, [Block Ciphers Implementations Provably Secure Against Second Order Side Channel Analysis](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-71039-4_8.pdf), FSE, 2008.

[45] L. Genelle _et al._, [Thwarting Higher-Order Side Channel Analysis with Additive and Multiplicative Maskings](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-23951-9_16.pdf), CHES, 2011.

[46] C. Carlet _et al._, [Higher-Order Masking Schemes for S-Boxes](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-34047-5_21.pdf), FSE, 2011.

[47] G. Barthe _et al._, [Strong Non-Interference and Type-Directed Higher-Order Masking](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2976749.2978427), ACM CCS, 2016.

[48] G. Barthe _et al._, [Parallel Implementations of Masking Schemes and the Bounded Moment Leakage Model](https://www.iacr.org/archive/eurocrypt2017/10210168/10210168.pdf), EUROCRYPT, 2017.

[49] S. Dhooghe, S. Nikova, [My Gadget Just Cares for Me - How NINA Can Prove Security Against Combined Attacks](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/615.pdf), CT-RSA, 2020.

[50] S. Belaïd _et al._, [Tight Private Circuits: Achieving Probing Security with the Least Refreshing](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/439.pdf), ASIACRYPT, 2018.

[51] S. Tillich, J. Großschädl, [Power Analysis Resistant AES Implementation with Instruction Set Extensions](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-540-74735-2_21.pdf), CHES, 2007.

[52] A. G. Bayrak _et al._, [A First Step Towards Automatic Application of Power Analysis Countermeasures](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2024724.2024778), DAC, 2011.

[53] A. G. Bayrak _et al._, [An Architecture-Independent Instruction Shuffler to Protect against Side-Channel Attacks](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2086696.2086699), TACO, 2012.

[54] A. Miss _et al._, [Compiler assisted masking](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-33027-8_4.pdf), CHES, 2012.

[55] M. Barbosa _et al._, A domain-specific type system for cryptographic components, FSEN, 2011.

[56] G. Agosta _et al._, [A Code Morphing Methodology to Automate Power Analysis Countermeasures](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2228360.2228376), DAC, 2012.

[57] A. G. Bayrak _et al._, [Sleuth: Automated verification of software power analysis countermeasures](https://www.iacr.org/archive/ches2013/80860192/80860192.pdf), CHES, 2013.

[58] C. Lattne, V. Adve, [LLVM: A compilation framework for lifelong program analysis & transformation](http://wwwi10.lrr.in.tum.de/~gerndt/home/Teaching/HPCSeminar/llvm_lifelong_program_analysispdf.pdf), CGO, 2004.

[59] C. Cada _et al._, [KLEE: Unassisted and Automatic Generation of High-Coverage Tests for Complex Systems Programs](https://static.usenix.org/events/osdi08/tech/full_papers/cadar/cadar.pdf), OSDI, 2008.

[60] H. Eldib _et al._, [SMT-based verification of software countermeasures against side-channel attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-642-54862-8_5.pdf), TACAS, 2014.

[61] H. Eldib, C. Wang, [Synthesis of Masking Countermeasures against Side Channel Attacks](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-319-08867-9_8.pdf), CAV, 2014.

[62] B. Dutertre, L. De Moura, [A fast linear-arithmetic solver for DPLL(T)](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/11817963_11.pdf), CAV, 2006.

[63] G. Barthe _et al._, [Verified Proofs of Higher-Order Masking](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-662-46800-5_18.pdf), EUROCRYPT, 2015.
